<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="dita-rules">
    <title>DITA Rules Engine</title>
    <shortdesc>DitaCraft includes 35 Schematron-equivalent validation rules organized in five categories to enforce DITA best practices and specification requirements, including 10 DITA 2.0-specific rules, plus support for user-defined custom regex rules.</shortdesc>

    <conbody>
        <section id="overview">
            <title>Overview</title>
            <p>The DITA Rules Engine validates your content against a set of rules derived from the DITA specification and authoring best practices. These rules go beyond DTD validation to catch semantic issues such as missing accessibility attributes, deprecated elements, and incorrect attribute usage.</p>
            <p>Rules are version-aware: DitaCraft automatically detects your DITA version (from <codeph>@DITAArchVersion</codeph> or DOCTYPE) and only applies rules relevant to that version.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="categories">
            <title>Rule Categories</title>
            <dl>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Mandatory</dt>
                    <dd>Rules required by the DITA specification. These catch constraint violations that would cause processing errors. Examples: <codeph>role="other"</codeph> requires <codeph>@otherrole</codeph>, deprecated <codeph>&lt;indextermref&gt;</codeph> element usage.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Recommendation</dt>
                    <dd>Best practice rules recommended by the DITA specification. Examples: adding short descriptions, using proper list structures, following naming conventions.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Authoring</dt>
                    <dd>Content quality rules for consistent and well-structured documentation. Examples: title length limits, nesting depth, content organization.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Accessibility</dt>
                    <dd>Rules ensuring your content is accessible to all users. Examples: <codeph>&lt;image&gt;</codeph> elements should have <codeph>&lt;alt&gt;</codeph> text, deprecated <codeph>alt</codeph> attribute should be converted to an <codeph>&lt;alt&gt;</codeph> element.</dd>
                </dlentry>
            </dl>
        </section>

        <section id="key-rules">
            <title>Key Rules</title>
            <p>Some commonly encountered rules include:</p>
            <simpletable>
                <sthead>
                    <stentry>Code</stentry>
                    <stentry>Category</stentry>
                    <stentry>Description</stentry>
                </sthead>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-001</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>role="other"</codeph> requires <codeph>@otherrole</codeph> attribute</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-002</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>&lt;note type="other"&gt;</codeph> requires <codeph>@othertype</codeph> attribute</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-003</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>&lt;indextermref&gt;</codeph> is deprecated</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-004</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>collection-type</codeph> not allowed on <codeph>&lt;reltable&gt;</codeph> or <codeph>&lt;relcolspec&gt;</codeph></stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-011</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Accessibility</stentry>
                    <stentry>Deprecated <codeph>alt</codeph> attribute on <codeph>&lt;image&gt;</codeph> — use <codeph>&lt;alt&gt;</codeph> element instead</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-030</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Accessibility</stentry>
                    <stentry>Missing <codeph>&lt;alt&gt;</codeph> element for <codeph>&lt;image&gt;</codeph></stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-040</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry>Nested <codeph>&lt;xref&gt;</codeph> not allowed</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-044</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Recommendation</stentry>
                    <stentry>Deprecated role values (<codeph>sample</codeph>, <codeph>external</codeph>)</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-046</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Recommendation</stentry>
                    <stentry>Elements with <codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph> should have <codeph>@id</codeph></stentry>
                </strow>
            </simpletable>
        </section>

        <section id="quick-fixes">
            <title>Quick Fixes</title>
            <p>DitaCraft provides 12 automatic quick fixes via the lightbulb menu (<uicontrol>Ctrl+.</uicontrol>):</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>Add missing DOCTYPE:</b> Inserts the appropriate DOCTYPE declaration based on root element</li>
                <li><b>Add missing ID:</b> Adds an ID attribute derived from the filename</li>
                <li><b>Add missing title:</b> Inserts a <codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph> element</li>
                <li><b>Remove empty element:</b> Removes elements with no content</li>
                <li><b>Rename duplicate ID:</b> Makes duplicate IDs unique</li>
                <li><b>Add <codeph>@otherrole</codeph>:</b> Inserts the missing attribute when <codeph>role="other"</codeph> is detected</li>
                <li><b>Remove deprecated <codeph>&lt;indextermref&gt;</codeph>:</b> Removes the deprecated element</li>
                <li><b>Convert <codeph>alt</codeph> attribute to <codeph>&lt;alt&gt;</codeph> element:</b> Migrates the deprecated attribute syntax to the modern element form</li>
                <li><b>Add missing <codeph>&lt;alt&gt;</codeph> to <codeph>&lt;image&gt;</codeph>:</b> Inserts an empty <codeph>&lt;alt&gt;</codeph> child element for accessibility</li>
                <li><b>Sanitize invalid ID:</b> Fixes invalid ID format by replacing illegal characters and ensuring a valid starting character</li>
                <li><b>Insert missing <codeph>&lt;booktitle&gt;</codeph>:</b> Adds the required booktitle structure to bookmaps</li>
                <li><b>Insert missing <codeph>&lt;mainbooktitle&gt;</codeph>:</b> Adds the required mainbooktitle inside an existing booktitle</li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <section id="dita-2-rules">
            <title>DITA 2.0 Rules</title>
            <p>DitaCraft includes 10 rules specific to DITA 2.0 that detect removed elements and attributes. These rules only apply when the DITA version is detected as 2.0 (via <codeph>@DITAArchVersion</codeph> or DOCTYPE).</p>
            <simpletable>
                <sthead>
                    <stentry>Code</stentry>
                    <stentry>Category</stentry>
                    <stentry>Description</stentry>
                </sthead>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-050</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>&lt;boolean&gt;</codeph> element removed in DITA 2.0</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-051</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>&lt;indextermref&gt;</codeph> element removed in DITA 2.0</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-052</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>&lt;object&gt;</codeph> removed — use <codeph>&lt;audio&gt;</codeph>, <codeph>&lt;video&gt;</codeph>, or <codeph>&lt;include&gt;</codeph></stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-053</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry>Learning specializations removed in DITA 2.0</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-054</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Accessibility</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>&lt;audio&gt;</codeph> should have <codeph>&lt;fallback&gt;</codeph> element</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-055</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Accessibility</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>&lt;video&gt;</codeph> should have <codeph>&lt;fallback&gt;</codeph> element</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-056</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>@print</codeph> attribute removed in DITA 2.0</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-057</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>@copy-to</codeph> attribute removed in DITA 2.0</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-058</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>@navtitle</codeph> attribute removed in DITA 2.0</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>DITA-SCH-059</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Mandatory</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>@query</codeph> attribute removed in DITA 2.0</stentry>
                </strow>
            </simpletable>
        </section>

        <section id="version-detection">
            <title>Version Detection</title>
            <p>DitaCraft automatically detects the DITA version of each document using these sources (in priority order):</p>
            <ol>
                <li>The <codeph>ditacraft.ditaVersion</codeph> setting (if not set to <codeph>"auto"</codeph>)</li>
                <li>The <codeph>@DITAArchVersion</codeph> attribute on the root element</li>
                <li>The DOCTYPE public identifier (e.g., <codeph>-//OASIS//DTD DITA 2.0 Topic//EN</codeph>)</li>
                <li>Defaults to DITA 1.3 if no version indicator is found</li>
            </ol>
            <p>Version-specific rules are only applied when the detected version matches their applicability range.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="custom-rules">
            <title>Custom Regex Rules</title>
            <p>In addition to the built-in rules, you can define custom validation rules using regex patterns in a JSON file. Set the <codeph>ditacraft.customRulesFile</codeph> setting to an absolute path pointing to your rules file.</p>
            <p>Each rule supports:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>id:</b> A unique identifier (e.g., <codeph>CUSTOM-001</codeph>)</li>
                <li><b>pattern:</b> A regular expression to match against document content</li>
                <li><b>message:</b> The diagnostic message displayed to the user</li>
                <li><b>severity:</b> One of <codeph>error</codeph>, <codeph>warning</codeph>, <codeph>information</codeph>, <codeph>hint</codeph></li>
                <li><b>fileTypes:</b> (Optional) Array of DITA file types to restrict the rule to (topic, concept, task, reference, glossentry, troubleshooting, map, bookmap)</li>
            </ul>
            <p>Rules are matched against content with comments and CDATA stripped to avoid false positives. The rules file is automatically reloaded when it changes.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="suppression">
            <title>Rule Suppression</title>
            <p>You can suppress specific rules using:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>Settings:</b> Use <codeph>ditacraft.validationSeverityOverrides</codeph> to set any diagnostic code to <codeph>"off"</codeph></li>
                <li><b>Inline comments:</b> Add <codeph>&lt;!-- ditacraft-disable CODE --&gt;</codeph> to suppress a code from that line until a matching <codeph>&lt;!-- ditacraft-enable CODE --&gt;</codeph></li>
                <li><b>File-level:</b> Add <codeph>&lt;!-- ditacraft-disable-file CODE --&gt;</codeph> anywhere in the file to suppress the code for the entire file</li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <section id="configuration">
            <title>Configuration</title>
            <p>Enable or disable the entire rules engine:</p>
            <codeblock outputclass="language-json">{
    "ditacraft.ditaRulesEnabled": true
}</codeblock>
            <p>Select which rule categories to apply:</p>
            <codeblock outputclass="language-json">{
    "ditacraft.ditaRulesCategories": [
        "mandatory",
        "recommendation",
        "authoring",
        "accessibility"
    ]
}</codeblock>
            <p>For example, to run only mandatory and accessibility rules:</p>
            <codeblock outputclass="language-json">{
    "ditacraft.ditaRulesCategories": ["mandatory", "accessibility"]
}</codeblock>
        </section>
    </conbody>
</concept>
