<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="key-resolution">
    <title>Key Resolution</title>
    <shortdesc>Use keys for indirect addressing and content reuse in your DITA projects. DitaCraft implements a fully spec-compliant DITA 1.3 key space construction algorithm including keyref chains, keyscope inheritance, and resolution diagnostics.</shortdesc>

    <conbody>
        <section id="overview">
            <title>Overview</title>
            <p>DITA keys provide a powerful mechanism for indirect addressing. Instead of using direct file paths, you define keys in your map and reference them throughout your topics. This enables:</p>
            <ul>
                <li>Easy updates when file locations change</li>
                <li>Conditional content through key scopes</li>
                <li>Centralized management of reusable content</li>
                <li>Simplified localization workflows</li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <section id="key-definitions">
            <title>Defining Keys</title>
            <p>Keys are defined in DITA maps using <codeph>&lt;keydef&gt;</codeph> elements or the <codeph>keys</codeph> attribute on <codeph>&lt;topicref&gt;</codeph>.</p>
            <p><b>Basic Key Definition:</b></p>
            <codeblock>&lt;keydef keys="product-name"&gt;
    &lt;topicmeta&gt;
        &lt;keywords&gt;
            &lt;keyword&gt;DitaCraft&lt;/keyword&gt;
        &lt;/keywords&gt;
    &lt;/topicmeta&gt;
&lt;/keydef&gt;</codeblock>
            <p><b>Key with href:</b></p>
            <codeblock>&lt;keydef keys="install-guide" href="topics/installation.dita"/&gt;</codeblock>
            <p><b>Key on topicref:</b></p>
            <codeblock>&lt;topicref keys="getting-started" href="topics/getting-started.dita"/&gt;</codeblock>
        </section>

        <section id="using-keyref">
            <title>Using keyref</title>
            <p>Reference keys using the <codeph>keyref</codeph> attribute to pull in text content or create links.</p>
            <p><b>Text Replacement:</b></p>
            <codeblock>&lt;!-- In your topic --&gt;
&lt;p&gt;Welcome to &lt;ph keyref="product-name"/&gt;!&lt;/p&gt;

&lt;!-- Renders as --&gt;
&lt;p&gt;Welcome to DitaCraft!&lt;/p&gt;</codeblock>
            <p><b>Link Creation:</b></p>
            <codeblock>&lt;xref keyref="install-guide"&gt;Installation Guide&lt;/xref&gt;</codeblock>
        </section>

        <section id="using-conkeyref">
            <title>Using conkeyref</title>
            <p>The <codeph>conkeyref</codeph> attribute combines key resolution with content referencing. It first resolves the key to a file, then pulls content from a specific element.</p>
            <codeblock>&lt;!-- Key definition --&gt;
&lt;keydef keys="shared-warnings" href="shared/warnings.dita"/&gt;

&lt;!-- Usage --&gt;
&lt;note conkeyref="shared-warnings/safety-warning"/&gt;</codeblock>
            <p>This resolves <codeph>shared-warnings</codeph> to <filepath>shared/warnings.dita</filepath>, then pulls the element with <codeph>id="safety-warning"</codeph>.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="key-space">
            <title>Key Space</title>
            <p>DitaCraft builds a key space from your root map. The key space includes:</p>
            <ul>
                <li>All key definitions in the root map</li>
                <li>Keys from referenced submaps</li>
                <li>Keys inherited through key scopes</li>
            </ul>
            <p><b>Key Precedence:</b> When the same key is defined multiple times, the first definition wins. Keys defined earlier in the map take precedence.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="key-scopes">
            <title>Key Scopes</title>
            <p>Key scopes allow you to define variations of the same content for different contexts.</p>
            <codeblock>&lt;topicgroup keyscope="admin"&gt;
    &lt;keydef keys="audience"&gt;
        &lt;topicmeta&gt;&lt;keywords&gt;&lt;keyword&gt;administrators&lt;/keyword&gt;&lt;/keywords&gt;&lt;/topicmeta&gt;
    &lt;/keydef&gt;
    &lt;topicref href="admin-guide.dita"/&gt;
&lt;/topicgroup&gt;

&lt;topicgroup keyscope="user"&gt;
    &lt;keydef keys="audience"&gt;
        &lt;topicmeta&gt;&lt;keywords&gt;&lt;keyword&gt;end users&lt;/keyword&gt;&lt;/keywords&gt;&lt;/topicmeta&gt;
    &lt;/keydef&gt;
    &lt;topicref href="user-guide.dita"/&gt;
&lt;/topicgroup&gt;</codeblock>
        </section>

        <section id="keyref-chains">
            <title>Keyref Chains</title>
            <p>A keyref chain occurs when a key definition itself uses a <codeph>keyref</codeph> attribute to point to another key, forming a multi-hop chain. DitaCraft follows the full chain to resolve the final target.</p>
            <p><b>Example:</b></p>
            <codeblock>&lt;!-- root.ditamap --&gt;
&lt;keydef keys="product" href="topics/product.dita"/&gt;

&lt;!-- submap.ditamap with @keyscope="enterprise" --&gt;
&lt;keydef keys="product" keyref="product"/&gt;</codeblock>
            <p>When resolving <codeph>keyref="enterprise.product"</codeph>, DitaCraft follows the chain through the scoped alias back to the root definition in <filepath>product.dita</filepath>.</p>
            <note type="important">Circular keyref chains are detected and short-circuited to prevent infinite loops.</note>
        </section>

        <section id="keyscope-inheritance">
            <title>Keyscope Inheritance</title>
            <p>DitaCraft implements the DITA 1.3 PushDown inheritance algorithm for key scopes. When a map element has a <codeph>@keyscope</codeph> attribute, its keys are made available under scope-qualified names throughout the parent map.</p>
            <p><b>Scope on a map element:</b></p>
            <codeblock>&lt;topicref href="submap.ditamap" keyscope="product-a"/&gt;</codeblock>
            <p>All keys in <filepath>submap.ditamap</filepath> are accessible as <codeph>product-a.<i>keyname</i></codeph> from the parent map.</p>
            <p><b>Scope on a non-map topicref (inline branch):</b></p>
            <codeblock>&lt;topicref href="chapter.dita" keyscope="draft"&gt;
    &lt;topicref href="draft-notes.dita"/&gt;
&lt;/topicref&gt;</codeblock>
            <p>DitaCraft treats <codeph>@keyscope</codeph> on a non-map topicref as an inline scope branch: keys defined within that branch are qualified under <codeph>draft.*</codeph> while still being accessible by their short names within the branch itself.</p>
            <p><b>Multiple scope names:</b> A single element can declare multiple scopes separated by spaces (<codeph>keyscope="a b"</codeph>). DitaCraft creates qualified aliases under each scope name.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="scope-explosion-cap">
            <title>Scope Explosion Protection</title>
            <p>Deeply nested key scopes can produce a very large number of qualified key aliases (one per scope combination). DitaCraft enforces a cap of <b>50,000 key space entries</b> to prevent excessive memory use and slow builds.</p>
            <p>When the cap is reached:</p>
            <ul>
                <li>DitaCraft stops generating additional scope aliases</li>
                <li>A <codeph>scopeExplosionWarning</codeph> flag is set on the key space</li>
                <li>All keys defined before the cap was reached remain available</li>
            </ul>
            <p>In practice, this limit is only reached with extremely large maps that have many deeply nested key scopes. Normal DITA projects are not affected.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="provenance-tracking">
            <title>Key Provenance</title>
            <p>Every key definition in DitaCraft's key space records its <b>source line number</b> (1-based) within the map file where it was defined. This information is used by:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><uicontrol>Go to Definition</uicontrol> — jumps to the exact line of the <codeph>&lt;keydef&gt;</codeph> element</li>
                <li>The Key Space View — shows the source location in tooltips</li>
                <li>Hover on keyref — displays the definition location alongside the resolved target</li>
            </ul>
            <p>For scope-qualified aliases generated from a nested scope, the source line is inherited from the original key definition.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="key-resolution-diagnostics">
            <title>Key Resolution Diagnostics</title>
            <p>DitaCraft provides tools for understanding exactly how a key was resolved, which is useful for debugging complex map hierarchies.</p>
            <p>When you hover over a <codeph>keyref</codeph> or <codeph>conkeyref</codeph> attribute, the hover tooltip shows:</p>
            <ul>
                <li>The resolved target file or inline content</li>
                <li>The key scope context used for resolution</li>
                <li>The source map and line where the key was defined</li>
                <li>Any keyref chain steps that were followed</li>
            </ul>
            <p>The underlying <codeph>explainKey()</codeph> API (used by the LSP server) returns a full <codeph>KeyResolutionReport</codeph> containing every lookup step, the effective key space, and the complete keyref chain — useful for extension authors building on top of DitaCraft.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="ditacraft-support">
            <title>DitaCraft Key Support Summary</title>
            <p>DitaCraft provides full DITA 1.3 spec-compliant key support:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>Key Space Construction:</b> BFS traversal with full cascade algorithm, peer map handling, and fallback key definitions</li>
                <li><b>Keyref Chains:</b> Multi-hop resolution with correct scope prefix tracking</li>
                <li><b>Keyscope Inheritance:</b> PushDown algorithm for map-level scopes and inline branch scopes on non-map topicrefs</li>
                <li><b>Scope Explosion Protection:</b> 50,000-entry cap with warning flag</li>
                <li><b>Provenance Tracking:</b> Source line recorded for every key definition</li>
                <li><b>Navigation:</b> Ctrl+Click on keyref and conkeyref navigates to the key's target with Go to Definition across files</li>
                <li><b>Caching:</b> Key space cached with 5-minute TTL, automatic invalidation on map changes</li>
                <li><b>Root Map Selection:</b> Explicitly set the root map via <uicontrol>DITA: Set Root Map</uicontrol></li>
                <li><b>Validation:</b> Undefined and missing keys flagged as diagnostics</li>
            </ul>
        </section>
    </conbody>
</concept>
