<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="validation">
    <title>Validation</title>
    <shortdesc>DitaCraft validates DITA files against XML syntax, DTD specifications, cross-references, DITA rules, and profiling constraints in real-time.</shortdesc>

    <conbody>
        <section id="validation-overview">
            <title>Validation Overview</title>
            <p>DitaCraft provides comprehensive validation to ensure your DITA content is well-formed, conforms to DITA specifications, uses valid cross-references, follows DITA best practices, and respects profiling constraints. Validation runs automatically as you edit and can also be triggered manually.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="what-is-validated">
            <title>What Gets Validated</title>
            <dl>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>XML Well-formedness</dt>
                    <dd>Checks for proper XML syntax: matching tags, valid attribute values, proper encoding, and correct entity references.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>DTD Conformance</dt>
                    <dd>Validates elements and attributes against DITA 1.3 DTDs. Ensures elements appear in allowed contexts with required attributes.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Content Model</dt>
                    <dd>Verifies child elements appear in the correct order and quantity according to the DTD content model.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>ID Uniqueness</dt>
                    <dd>Checks that ID attributes are unique within a topic.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Cross-Reference Validation</dt>
                    <dd>Validates href, conref, keyref, and conkeyref attributes to ensure target files exist, topic and element IDs are present, and keys are defined in the key space. See <xref keyref="cross-ref-validation"/> for details.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>DITA Rules Engine</dt>
                    <dd>43 Schematron-equivalent rules in five categories (mandatory, recommendation, authoring, accessibility, DITA 2.0 removal) enforce DITA specification requirements and best practices. Includes 10 DITA 2.0-specific rules for removed elements and attributes. Rules are version-aware and include 12 quick fixes. Supports user-defined custom regex rules, per-rule severity overrides, and comment-based rule suppression. See <xref keyref="dita-rules"/> for details.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Profiling Validation</dt>
                    <dd>When a subject scheme map is present, validates that profiling attribute values (audience, platform, product, etc.) use only the allowed values defined by the scheme. See <xref keyref="profiling-validation"/> for details.</dd>
                </dlentry>
            </dl>
        </section>

        <section id="validation-engines">
            <title>Validation Engines</title>
            <p>DitaCraft supports three validation engines, each with different capabilities:</p>
            <simpletable>
                <sthead>
                    <stentry>Engine</stentry>
                    <stentry>Pros</stentry>
                    <stentry>Cons</stentry>
                </sthead>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>typesxml</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Full DTD support, 100% W3C conformance, no external dependencies</stentry>
                    <stentry>Slightly slower for very large files</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>built-in</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Very fast, lightweight, basic content model checking</stentry>
                    <stentry>Limited DTD support, may miss some errors</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>xmllint</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Industry-standard libxml2, excellent performance</stentry>
                    <stentry>Requires external installation</stentry>
                </strow>
            </simpletable>
            <p><b>Recommendation:</b> The <codeph>built-in</codeph> engine (the default) provides a good balance of speed and accuracy for most users. Switch to <codeph>typesxml</codeph> when you need strict DTD conformance checking.</p>
            <p><b>Additional Validation:</b></p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>OASIS Catalog Support:</b> The <codeph>typesxml</codeph> engine uses an OASIS XML Catalog to resolve PUBLIC identifiers to bundled DTDs, with a parser pool (3 instances) for efficient reuse.</li>
                <li><b>RNG (RelaxNG) Validation:</b> Optional RelaxNG schema validation via <codeph>salve-annos</codeph> and <codeph>saxes</codeph>. Enable by setting <codeph>ditacraft.schemaFormat</codeph> to <codeph>"rng"</codeph> and providing a schema path via <codeph>ditacraft.rngSchemaPath</codeph>. RNG schemas are compiled to JSON and cached (up to 20 grammars).</li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <section id="lsp-diagnostics">
            <title>LSP-Powered Diagnostics</title>
            <p>DitaCraft uses a built-in Language Server Protocol (LSP) implementation to provide real-time diagnostics. The LSP server validates your documents in the background and reports issues instantly as you type, without waiting for a manual save or validation trigger.</p>
            <p>The LSP diagnostics cover:</p>
            <ul>
                <li>XML well-formedness (mismatched tags, invalid syntax)</li>
                <li>DITA structure validation (element context, required attributes)</li>
                <li>ID uniqueness within documents</li>
                <li>Cross-reference validation (href, conref, keyref, conkeyref)</li>
                <li>DITA rules (specification compliance, best practices, accessibility)</li>
                <li>Profiling validation (subject scheme constraints)</li>
            </ul>
            <p>LSP diagnostics appear with the source label <codeph>dita-lsp</codeph> in the Problems panel, while client-side validations appear with the <codeph>dita</codeph> source label. DITA rules diagnostics appear with the source label <codeph>dita-rules</codeph>.</p>
            <p>All diagnostic messages are localized — see <xref keyref="localization"/> for supported languages.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="diagnostic-levels">
            <title>Diagnostic Levels</title>
            <p>Validation issues are reported at three severity levels:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>Error (Red):</b> Critical issues that must be fixed. The document is not valid DITA.</li>
                <li><b>Warning (Yellow):</b> Potential issues that should be reviewed. The document may be valid but has problems.</li>
                <li><b>Information (Blue):</b> Suggestions and notes. Not errors, but helpful for improvement.</li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <section id="viewing-results">
            <title>Viewing Validation Results</title>
            <p>Validation results appear in multiple places:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>Editor Squiggles:</b> Colored underlines appear on problematic content</li>
                <li><b>Problems Panel:</b> Full list of all diagnostics (<uicontrol>Ctrl+Shift+M</uicontrol>)</li>
                <li><b>Status Bar:</b> Shows error/warning count for the current file</li>
                <li><b>File Explorer:</b> File icons show validation status</li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <section id="automatic-validation">
            <title>Automatic Validation</title>
            <p>By default, DitaCraft validates automatically:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>On Open:</b> When you open a DITA file</li>
                <li><b>On Save:</b> When you save a file (configurable)</li>
                <li><b>On Change:</b> After you stop typing, with smart debouncing:
                    <ul>
                        <li><b>Topics:</b> 300ms debounce for fast feedback</li>
                        <li><b>Maps:</b> 1000ms debounce (maps are more expensive to validate)</li>
                    </ul>
                    Per-document cancellation ensures only the latest edit triggers validation.
                </li>
            </ul>
            <p>To disable automatic validation, set <codeph>ditacraft.autoValidate</codeph> to <codeph>false</codeph> in settings.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="rate-limiting">
            <title>Rate Limiting</title>
            <p>To prevent performance issues, DitaCraft limits validation requests:</p>
            <ul>
                <li>Maximum 10 requests per second per file</li>
                <li>Excess requests are silently skipped during auto-validation</li>
                <li>Manual validation shows a warning if rate limited</li>
            </ul>
            <p>This protects against excessive CPU usage when making rapid edits.</p>
        </section>
    </conbody>
</concept>
