<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE reference PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Reference//EN" "reference.dtd">
<reference id="validation-settings">
    <title>Validation Settings</title>
    <shortdesc>Configure validation engine, automatic validation, cross-reference checking, DITA rules, profiling validation, severity overrides, custom rules, and large file optimization.</shortdesc>

    <refbody>
        <section id="validation-engine">
            <title>ditacraft.validationEngine</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> String (enum)</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>"built-in"</codeph></p>
            <p><b>Options:</b></p>
            <dl>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt><codeph>"built-in"</codeph></dt>
                    <dd>Lightweight validation with content model checking. Fast and suitable for most DITA authoring workflows. The default engine.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt><codeph>"typesxml"</codeph></dt>
                    <dd>Full DTD validation using TypesXML parser. Provides 100% W3C conformance with complete DTD support. Best for strict compliance checking.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt><codeph>"xmllint"</codeph></dt>
                    <dd>External validation using libxml2's xmllint tool. Requires xmllint to be installed on your system. Provides excellent performance and accuracy.</dd>
                </dlentry>
            </dl>
            <p><b>Choosing an Engine:</b></p>
            <simpletable>
                <sthead>
                    <stentry>Use Case</stentry>
                    <stentry>Recommended Engine</stentry>
                </sthead>
                <strow>
                    <stentry>General DITA authoring</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>built-in</codeph> (default)</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry>Strict DTD conformance required</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>typesxml</codeph> or <codeph>xmllint</codeph></stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry>Very large files (1000+ elements)</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>built-in</codeph> or <codeph>xmllint</codeph></stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry>Quick syntax checking only</stentry>
                    <stentry><codeph>built-in</codeph></stentry>
                </strow>
            </simpletable>
        </section>

        <section id="auto-validate">
            <title>ditacraft.autoValidate</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> Boolean</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>true</codeph></p>
            <p>When enabled, DitaCraft validates DITA files automatically:</p>
            <ul>
                <li>When a file is opened</li>
                <li>When a file is saved</li>
                <li>After typing stops, with smart debouncing (300ms for topics, 1000ms for maps)</li>
            </ul>
            <p>Set to <codeph>false</codeph> to disable automatic validation. You can still validate manually using <uicontrol>Ctrl+Shift+V</uicontrol>.</p>
            <p><b>When to Disable:</b></p>
            <ul>
                <li>Working with very large files that cause performance issues</li>
                <li>Editing files that are intentionally incomplete</li>
                <li>When you prefer manual validation control</li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <section id="max-problems">
            <title>ditacraft.maxNumberOfProblems</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> Number</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>100</codeph></p>
            <p>The maximum number of diagnostic problems reported per file. Increase this value if you work with very large files and need to see all issues. Decrease it if the Problems panel becomes overwhelming.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="dita-rules-enabled">
            <title>ditacraft.ditaRulesEnabled</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> Boolean</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>true</codeph></p>
            <p>Enable or disable the DITA Rules Engine. When enabled, DitaCraft validates your content against 35 Schematron-equivalent rules covering specification compliance, best practices, and accessibility (including 10 DITA 2.0-specific rules). Set to <codeph>false</codeph> to disable all DITA rules validation.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="dita-rules-categories">
            <title>ditacraft.ditaRulesCategories</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> Array of strings</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>["mandatory", "recommendation", "authoring", "accessibility"]</codeph></p>
            <p>Select which DITA rule categories to apply. Available categories:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><codeph>"mandatory"</codeph> — Rules required by the DITA specification</li>
                <li><codeph>"recommendation"</codeph> — Best practices recommended by the DITA specification</li>
                <li><codeph>"authoring"</codeph> — Content quality and consistency rules</li>
                <li><codeph>"accessibility"</codeph> — Accessibility compliance rules</li>
            </ul>
            <p>For example, to run only mandatory and accessibility rules:</p>
            <codeblock outputclass="language-json">{
    "ditacraft.ditaRulesCategories": ["mandatory", "accessibility"]
}</codeblock>
        </section>

        <section id="cross-ref-validation-enabled">
            <title>ditacraft.crossRefValidationEnabled</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> Boolean</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>true</codeph></p>
            <p>Enable or disable cross-reference validation. When enabled, DitaCraft checks that href, conref, keyref, and conkeyref attributes point to valid targets. Set to <codeph>false</codeph> if you are working with incomplete content where references are expected to be unresolved.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="subject-scheme-validation-enabled">
            <title>ditacraft.subjectSchemeValidationEnabled</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> Boolean</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>true</codeph></p>
            <p>Enable or disable subject scheme validation. When enabled and a subject scheme map is present in the workspace, DitaCraft validates that profiling attribute values (audience, platform, product, etc.) match the controlled vocabulary defined by the scheme. Set to <codeph>false</codeph> to allow any profiling attribute values.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="dita-version">
            <title>ditacraft.ditaVersion</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> String (enum)</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>"auto"</codeph></p>
            <p><b>Options:</b> <codeph>"auto"</codeph>, <codeph>"1.0"</codeph>, <codeph>"1.1"</codeph>, <codeph>"1.2"</codeph>, <codeph>"1.3"</codeph>, <codeph>"2.0"</codeph></p>
            <p>Override the auto-detected DITA version for validation. When set to <codeph>"auto"</codeph> (default), DitaCraft detects the version from <codeph>@DITAArchVersion</codeph> or DOCTYPE. Set an explicit version to force version-specific rules (e.g., <codeph>"2.0"</codeph> to enable DITA 2.0 rules for all documents).</p>
        </section>

        <section id="schema-format">
            <title>ditacraft.schemaFormat</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> String (enum)</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>"dtd"</codeph></p>
            <p><b>Options:</b> <codeph>"dtd"</codeph>, <codeph>"rng"</codeph></p>
            <p>Schema format for validation. The default <codeph>"dtd"</codeph> uses standard DTD validation. Set to <codeph>"rng"</codeph> to enable RelaxNG schema validation using <codeph>salve-annos</codeph>. Requires <codeph>ditacraft.rngSchemaPath</codeph> to be set.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="rng-schema-path">
            <title>ditacraft.rngSchemaPath</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> String</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>""</codeph></p>
            <p>Path to the directory containing RNG schema files (e.g., a DITA-OT's schema directory). Required when <codeph>ditacraft.schemaFormat</codeph> is set to <codeph>"rng"</codeph>. RNG schemas are compiled to JSON and cached for performance (up to 20 grammars).</p>
        </section>

        <section id="root-map">
            <title>ditacraft.rootMap</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> String</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>""</codeph></p>
            <p>Explicit root map path (relative to workspace root). Leave empty for automatic root map discovery. Set via the <uicontrol>DITA: Set Root Map</uicontrol> command or directly in settings.</p>
            <p>The root map determines the key space for keyref/conkeyref resolution, cross-reference validation scope, and subject scheme discovery. See <xref keyref="root-map"/> for details.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="rate-limiting">
            <title>Rate Limiting</title>
            <p>DitaCraft includes built-in rate limiting to prevent performance issues:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>Limit:</b> 10 validation requests per second per file</li>
                <li><b>Behavior:</b> Excess requests are silently skipped during auto-validation</li>
                <li><b>Manual Validation:</b> Shows a warning if rate limited</li>
            </ul>
            <p>Rate limiting cannot be configured but ensures stable performance during rapid editing.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="severity-overrides">
            <title>ditacraft.validationSeverityOverrides</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> Object</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>{}</codeph></p>
            <p>Override the severity of any diagnostic code. Map diagnostic codes to <codeph>"error"</codeph>, <codeph>"warning"</codeph>, <codeph>"information"</codeph>, <codeph>"hint"</codeph>, or <codeph>"off"</codeph> (to suppress entirely).</p>
            <codeblock outputclass="language-json">{
    "ditacraft.validationSeverityOverrides": {
        "DITA-SCH-001": "hint",
        "DITA-ID-002": "off",
        "DITA-STRUCT-005": "error"
    }
}</codeblock>
        </section>

        <section id="custom-rules-file">
            <title>ditacraft.customRulesFile</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> String</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>""</codeph></p>
            <p>Absolute path to a JSON file defining custom regex validation rules. Each rule specifies a regex pattern, message, severity, and optional file type filter. Rules are re-loaded automatically when the file changes.</p>
            <codeblock outputclass="language-json">{
    "rules": [
        {
            "id": "CUSTOM-001",
            "pattern": "&lt;draft-comment\\b",
            "message": "Draft comments should be removed before publishing",
            "severity": "warning",
            "fileTypes": ["topic", "concept", "task"]
        }
    ]
}</codeblock>
        </section>

        <section id="large-file-threshold">
            <title>ditacraft.largeFileThresholdKB</title>
            <p><b>Type:</b> Number</p>
            <p><b>Default:</b> <codeph>500</codeph></p>
            <p>Files larger than this threshold (in KB) skip heavy validation phases (cross-references, DITA rules, profiling, custom rules, etc.) for performance. Set to <codeph>0</codeph> to disable the optimization and always run all phases. A <codeph>DITA-PERF-001</codeph> informational diagnostic is shown when phases are skipped.</p>
        </section>

        <section id="comment-suppression">
            <title>Comment-Based Rule Suppression</title>
            <p>You can suppress specific diagnostic codes inline using XML comments:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><codeph>&lt;!-- ditacraft-disable CODE --&gt;</codeph> — Suppress a code from this point until re-enabled</li>
                <li><codeph>&lt;!-- ditacraft-enable CODE --&gt;</codeph> — Re-enable a previously suppressed code</li>
                <li><codeph>&lt;!-- ditacraft-disable-file CODE --&gt;</codeph> — Suppress a code for the entire file</li>
            </ul>
            <p>Multiple codes can be specified, separated by spaces: <codeph>&lt;!-- ditacraft-disable DITA-SCH-001 DITA-ID-002 --&gt;</codeph></p>
        </section>

        <section id="xmllint-setup">
            <title>Setting Up xmllint</title>
            <p>To use the <codeph>xmllint</codeph> engine, install libxml2:</p>
            <p><b>Windows:</b></p>
            <ol>
                <li>Download from <xref href="https://www.zlatkovic.com/libxml.en.html" format="html" scope="external">zlatkovic.com</xref></li>
                <li>Add the bin directory to your PATH</li>
            </ol>
            <p><b>macOS:</b></p>
            <codeblock>brew install libxml2</codeblock>
            <p><b>Linux (Debian/Ubuntu):</b></p>
            <codeblock>sudo apt-get install libxml2-utils</codeblock>
            <p><b>Verification:</b></p>
            <codeblock>xmllint --version</codeblock>
        </section>
    </refbody>
</reference>
