<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="introduction">
    <title>Introduction to DitaCraft</title>
    <shortdesc>DitaCraft is a comprehensive Visual Studio Code extension for editing and publishing DITA content.</shortdesc>

    <conbody>
        <section id="what-is-ditacraft">
            <title>What is DitaCraft?</title>
            <p>DitaCraft is the easiest way to edit and publish your DITA (Darwin Information Typing Architecture) files directly from Visual Studio Code. It provides a complete authoring environment with:</p>
            <ul>
                <li>LSP-powered IntelliSense with auto-completion, hover docs, and document symbols</li>
                <li>Full DTD validation with three engine options</li>
                <li>Smart navigation with Ctrl+Click on href, conref, keyref, and conkeyref</li>
                <li>Cross-file Go to Definition, Find References, and Rename</li>
                <li>Key space resolution for keyref and conkeyref</li>
                <li>DITAVAL conditional processing support</li>
                <li>Live HTML5 preview with bidirectional scroll sync</li>
                <li>One-click publishing via DITA-OT</li>
                <li>Interactive map visualizer</li>
                <li>XML formatting with code actions and quick fixes</li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <section id="key-features">
            <title>Key Features</title>
            <p>DitaCraft offers the following key features:</p>
            <dl>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>LSP-Powered IntelliSense</dt>
                    <dd>Context-aware auto-completion for DITA elements, attributes, and values. Hover documentation for 364+ elements. Document outline and workspace symbol search.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Smart Navigation</dt>
                    <dd>Ctrl+Click on <codeph>href</codeph>, <codeph>conref</codeph>, <codeph>keyref</codeph>, and <codeph>conkeyref</codeph> attributes to navigate directly to referenced content. Cross-file Go to Definition, Find References, and Rename.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Full DTD Validation</dt>
                    <dd>Real-time validation with three engine options: built-in (default), TypesXML (full DTD), and xmllint. LSP-powered diagnostics for instant feedback as you type.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Live Preview</dt>
                    <dd>Side-by-side HTML5 preview with bidirectional scroll sync, theme support, and print mode.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>DITA-OT Integration</dt>
                    <dd>Publish to HTML5, PDF, EPUB, and more with direct DITA Open Toolkit integration.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>DITAVAL Support</dt>
                    <dd>Full IntelliSense for DITAVAL conditional processing files including element completion, attribute values, and action keywords.</dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>Map Visualizer</dt>
                    <dd>Interactive tree view showing your DITA map hierarchy with navigation support.</dd>
                </dlentry>
            </dl>
        </section>

        <section id="supported-files">
            <title>Supported File Types</title>
            <p>DitaCraft supports the following DITA file types:</p>
            <simpletable>
                <sthead>
                    <stentry>Extension</stentry>
                    <stentry>Description</stentry>
                </sthead>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><filepath>.dita</filepath></stentry>
                    <stentry>DITA topics (concept, task, reference, topic)</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><filepath>.ditamap</filepath></stentry>
                    <stentry>DITA maps for organizing topics</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><filepath>.bookmap</filepath></stentry>
                    <stentry>Book-oriented maps with chapters and parts</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><filepath>.ditaval</filepath></stentry>
                    <stentry>DITAVAL conditional processing profiles</stentry>
                </strow>
            </simpletable>
        </section>

        <section id="version-info">
            <title>Version Information</title>
            <p>This guide covers DitaCraft version 0.5.0, which includes:</p>
            <ul>
                <li>LSP server with IntelliSense, diagnostics, and navigation</li>
                <li>DITAVAL conditional processing support</li>
                <li>Cross-file Go to Definition, Find References, and Rename</li>
                <li>XML formatting with code actions and quick fixes</li>
                <li>Improved key space resolution with better root map discovery</li>
                <li>cSpell auto-prompt for spell checking setup</li>
                <li>737+ comprehensive tests (547 client + 190 server)</li>
            </ul>
        </section>
    </conbody>
</concept>
